# LPI 101

## Topic 101: System administration

### 1. Determine and configure hardware settings

#### Introduction

- Until the mid 2000s, the configuration utility was implemented in the BIOS ( Basic Input/Output System ), the standard for firmware containing the basic configuration routines found in x86 motherboards. 
- From the end of the first decade of the 2000s, machines based on the x86 architecture started to replace the BIOS with a new implementation called UEFI ( Unified Extensible Firmware Interface ), which has more sophisticated features for identification, testing, configuration and firmware upgrades.
-  Despite the  change, it is not uncommon to still call the configuration utility BIOS, as both implementations fulfill the same basic purpose.

#### Device Activation

- The system configuration utility is presented after pressing a specific key when the computer is  turned on. Usually `F2` or `F12`
- In the BIOS setup utility it is possible to enable and disable integrated peripherals, activate basic  error protection and change hardware settings like IRQ (interrupt request) and DMA (direct memory  access)
- We also need to define which storage device has the correct bootloader and select it as the first entry in the boot order.

#### Device Inspection in Linux

- Once devices are correctly identified, it is up to the operating system to associate the corresponding software components required by them.

#### Commands for inspection

In order for the different devices to work properly, they need a software called a **kernel module** ( or driver ). 

To inspect the devices, we use mainly these two commands ( **Note that some information won't be shown without root privilege** )

- `lspci` : Show all devices currently connected to PCI  ( *Peripheral Component Interconnect* ) bus. 
  - PCI devices can be : 
    - components attached to motherboard ( disk controller ... ) 
    - expansion card fitted into a PCI slot (external graphic card)
  - **Default Format** : ( eg `00:00.0 Host bridge: Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. [AMD] Renoir/Cezanne Root Complex` )
    -  `xx:xx.x`  : unique address of the corresponding PCI device
    - Full name of device
  - **Options**
    - `-s [Address]` : Address of pci to show info about
    - `-v` : verbose ( more details about pci device )
	    - contains : **kernel driver in use**, **kernel modules**, **subsystem**...
	- `-k` : show **kernel driver in use** and **kernel modules** in addition to the default information

- `lsusb` : Lists USB (*Universal Serial Bus*) devices currently connected to the machine. USB interface is largely used to connect  input devices — keyboards, pointing devices — and removable storage media.
  - **Default Format** : ( e.g. `Bus 001 Device 007: ID 0424:7800 Standard Microsystems Corp.` )
    -  **Usb Channel**
    - **device connected to it**
  - **Options**
    - `-v` : verbose
    - `-d [vendor]:[product]` : show only devices with the specified vendor and product  ID.
    - `-s [[bus]:][devnum]` :  show only devices in specified bus and/or devnum.
    - `-t` : show the current USB devices mappings as a hierarchical tree, also shows the Drivers of the devices ( e.g `Driver=xhci_hcd/2p` )

- `lsmod` : show all  currently loaded modules
  -  **Default Format** : (e.g. `videodev 132348 2 gspca_main,gspca_pac7302`)
    -  **Module Name**
    - **Size** : Ram occupied by the module in bytes
    - **Used by** : depending modules (for example here we have 2)

- `modprobe` : load / unload modules
  - **Options**
    - `-r [module-name]` : unload module  
    - `-a [module-name` : load module

- `modinfo [module-name]` : information about a module
  - **Options**
    - `-p`  : display all available parameters and ignore the other information


- Customized parameters for a module can be made persistent by including them in the file  `/etc/modprobe.conf` or in individual files with the extension `.conf` in the directory `/etc/modprobe.d/`

- `/etc/modprobe.d/blacklist.conf` : can be used to block the loading of a module

> You can modify the `/etc/modprobe.d/blacklist.conf` file that already exists on  the system by default. However, the preferred method is to create a separate configuration file, `/etc/modprobe.d/<module_name>.conf`, that will contain settings specific only to the given kernel module.

#### Information Files and Device Files

- `lspci`, `lsusb` and `lsmod` pull informations from files stored under `/proc` and `/sys`

- `/proc` : directory that contains files with information regarding running processes and hardware resources.
  - `/proc/cpuinfo` : Lists detailed information about the CPU(s) found by the operating system.
  - `/proc/interrupts` : A list of numbers of the interrupts per IO device for each CPU.
  - `/proc/ioports` :  Lists currently registered Input/Output port regions in use.
  - `/proc/dma` : Lists the registered DMA (direct memory access) channels in use.

- `/sys` : directory that has the specific purpose of storing device information and kernel data related to hardware.
- `/dev` : Every file inside  `/dev` is associated with a system device, particularly storage devices.
  - A Legacy IDE hard drive, for example, when connected to the motherboard’s first IDE channel, is represented by the file /dev/hda. Every partition in this disk will be identified by /dev/hda1, /dev/hda2 up to the last partition found.
  - Removable devices are handled by the **udev** subsystem, which creates the corresponding devices in `/dev`. The Linux kernel captures the hardware detection event and passes it to the udev process, which then identifies the device and dynamically creates corresponding files in `/dev`
  - **udev** is responsible for the identification and configuration of the devices already present during machine power-up ( coldplug detection ) and the devices identified while the system is running ( hotplug detection ). Udev relies on **SysFS**, the pseudo filesystem for hardware related information mounted in `/sys`.

#### Storage Devices

- Every block device is  identified by a file in the /dev directory, with the name of the file depending on the device type (IDE, SATA, SCSI, etc.) and its partitions.
  - CD/DVD connected to the second IDE channel will be identified  as `/dev/hdc` ( `/dev/hda` and `/dev/hdb` are reserved for the master and slave devices on the first IDE  channel)
  - an old floppy drive will be identified as `/dev/fdO`, `/dev/fd1`.
- Most storage devices are now identified as if they were SCSI devices, regardless of their hardware type. IDE, SSD and USB block devices will be prefixed by `sd`.
  - For **IDE disks**, the `sd` prefix will be used, but the third letter will be chosen depending on whether  the drive is a master or slave ( `sda`, `sdb` ), Partitions are listed numerically : 
    - `/dev/sda1`, `/dev/sda2`, etc. are used for the first and second partitions of the block device identified first
    - `/dev/sdb1`, `/dev/sdb2`, etc. used to identify the first and second partitions of the block device identified second.
- The exception to this pattern occurs with memory cards (SD cards) and NVMe devices (SSD connected to the PCI Express bus) : 
  -  For **SD cards**
    - `/dev/mmcblk0p1`, `/dev/mmcblk0p2`, etc. are used for the first and second partitions of the device identified first 
    - `/dev/mmcblk1p1`, `/dev/mmcblk1p2`, etc. used to identify the first and second  partitions of the device identified second. NVM
  -  For **NVMe devices**
    -  They receive the prefix `nvme`, as in  `/dev/nvme0n1p1` and `/dev/nvme0n1p2`.


### 2. Boot the system

### 3. Change runlevels / boot targets and shutdown or reboot system

## Topic 102: Linux installation and package management

### 1. Design hard disk layout

### 2. Install a boot manager

### 3. Manage shared libraries

### 4. Use Debian package management

### 5. Use RPM and YUM package management

### 6. Linux as a virtualization guest

## Topic 103: Gnu and Unix commands


## Topic 104: Devices, linux filesystems, filesystem hierarchy standard